#Philosophy/Marx/Capital [[Capital]]
Although the rate of surplus-value can be expressed in various mathematically equivalent forms, only one form reveals the true relationship in capitalism: surplus labour divided by necessary labour. Bourgeois economists prefer formulas based on the value of the product, which hide the fact that surplus-value is simply unpaid labour. Capital appears to self-valorize only because it appropriates unpaid labour, and many economist formulate exploitation as an equal exchange. All surplus-value is the result of unpaid labour, and the rate of surplus-value measures the degree of exploitation of labour by capital.
- - -
The correct formula for Rate of Surplus-Value = Surplus labour / Necessary labour.
The formula 'surplus-value / value of total product' replaces labour-time relations with product relations, this obscures the fact that the surplus comes from unpaid labour, not from the product as a whole, and leads to the false appearance that capitalist and worker share the product proportionally to what they contribute. But the worker’s contribution is time, while capital’s supposed contribution is just value advanced to purchase labour-power.
In a 12 hour working day, 6 hours necessary labour, 6 hours surplus labour, the true exploitation rate is 's/v = 6/6 = 100%'.
	The second formula says 'Surplus labour / Working day = 6/12 = 50%', that halves exploitation, it expresses surplus as a fraction of the entire day, rather than as a fraction of what the worker gets.
The formula 'surplus labour / total working day' will always be below 100%, because surplus labour can never exceed the entire working day, but exploitation can be at a percentage greater than 100%.
'Unpaid labour / Paid labour' is actually equal to 'Surplus labour / Necessary labour'. When they phrase it as the capitalist pays for labour, it suggests that workers are paid for the whole day and surplus-value is merely a difference in prices or productivity. But in reality, Workers are paid only for necessary labour, and work beyond that. Labour-power (the worker’s capacity) is paid for, but labour (actual labour performed) is not. The capitalist gets 12 hours of labour by paying only for 6 hours worth of labour-power.
Capital appears as if it creates surplus value automatically, but all capitalist profit is unpaid labour crystallized in commodities. Capital cannot valorize itself, living labour does, and capital merely appropriates the portion of it that isn’t paid. Capital’s power is simply: ownership of the means of production, and the social ability to compel workers to work longer than necessary.